# Statements

At the most basic level, a Java program is simply a series of statements, executed according the flow of the application, until it finishes. Broadly speaking, there are two types of statements in Java: expression statements, and control flow statements. Expression statements are made from expressions, which compute values and probably use operators to do so. Statements can then be grouped into blocks with the { } operators. So an expression in Java computes a value. You’ve seen a lot of these already – variable declarations are expressions, because they are either implicitly assigned a default value or assigned one explicitly. In the statement “int a;”, a is an expression, as is the “a = 5” part of int a = 5;. An expression could also be a method invocation that returns a result, a mathematical equation, or any combinationAll that matters is that a value be returned. The type of data returned by an expression depends on the types of the elements used therein. A = 5 returns an int, because the assignment operator returns the same type of data to the left side (a) that is used on the right side. B < 3 will return a boolean result, because the < operator only returns a boolean result. A statement is equivalent to a single sentence in a natural language like English. Any use of an assignment operator is a statement, including operators where the assignment is implied, like ++ or *=. Method invocations are also statements, as are object creation statements that use the “new” keyword. A block is a grouping of zero or more statements between curly braces. You can use a block anywhere a single statement is allowed. Control flow statements can be further divided into decision statements and loop statements. A decision statement, just like the name implies, forces the program to make a “decision” regarding which code to execute next. It is sometimes referred to as a “conditional branch” in the program flow. In flow chart notation it is represented by a diamond symbol, and in English, it’s a question. Is ‘x’ equal to three?Is the user’s last name “James”?Decision statements are used to check to see if a particular condition has been met and then take appropriate action based on the outcome. Consider the following class in Eclipse which determines whether a number is even or oddThe cornerstone of decision making in Java is the IF statement. It is shown here testing the variable “number” to see if the remainder, after dividing by two, is equivalent to zero. In Java, the “if…else” statement consists of decision logic followed by a block of code to be executed should the test result be “true”. Should the test outcome be false, control jumps instead to the “else” block of code. If the test is true, the “else” block will be skipped entirely. When we run this program we get the expected result on the console at the bottom. The last kind of conditional statement is the switch statement. Where an if-then-else statement evaluates a chain of logical expressions to arrive at a single execution path, a switch statement can evaluate a single value and have multiple possible execution paths based on that value. You can switch off of a byte, short, int, char, and String type value. They work like this. You have the switch statement itself, followed by an expression in parenthesis that returns one of the aforementioned datatypes. Typically this is just a variable. Inside the switch block, you have a number of case statements, with each case occurring for a particular value the expression could return. The case statement ends in a colon, and after that colon, each successive line of code will execute until a break statement is reached. Execution can “fall through” a case if there’s no break; statement, so be careful here!If none of the cases are met, the default case executes. Consider this program, which switches on an int variable to print the day of the week the number corresponds to. If I change the value of the int variable and rerun the program, the switch statement will execute a different case. If I remove a break statement and rerun the program, the execution will clearly fall through from the executed case into the next, until a break statement is reached. A loop statement simply executes the same block of code over and over until a particular condition is met. These are highly useful for doing things like loading and reading arrays, searching databases, and generating numeric sequences just to name a few. There are three types of loops listed here as the “for loop”, the “while loop” and the “do while loop. ”The for loop iterates “for” a predetermined number of times. The for command has three parts – the initialization statement, the boolean termination expression, and the increment statement. Following this is a block of statements to be executed. When the loop begins, the initialization statement executes. Then the termination expression is checked to see if the loop should end – if not, the code in the block executes, and then the increment statement executes. After the increment statement executes, the termination expression is evaluated again, and so on. If the termination expression ever evaluates to true, the for loop stops and the program’s execution continues. In eclipse we have the following class containing a FOR loop inside the main which prints numbers one through tenThe FOR loop begins with a declaration for the loop variable, COUNT, which is an integer. After the semicolon, the condition for which the loop will operate is given; in this case, for COUNT values less than and equal to 10. Again, after the semicolon, the code to run after each iteration is supplied. In this case COUNT will be incremented by one on each pass through the loop as signified by the ++ operator. When COUNT equals 11 the loop terminates and control passes to the statements immediately following the loop body. Be aware that the count variable is only defined while the loop operates. After the loop concludes we say the variable COUNT is out of scope. The compiler will not allow you to do anything further with it. When we run this program, we expect it to output the loop variable’s value on each pass. And it does…A while loop operates as long as a certain boolean expression evaluates to true, and they’re much simpler to write: while, then the expression in parenthesis, followed by the code block to be executed continuously. Typically, you want to write some code that will make sure the while loop’s expression will eventually evaluate to false. If the expression is never false, the loop will run forever!On the other hand, if the expression never resolves to true, the loop is effectively skipped. A do-while is similar, save that it always executes at least once. This is because the syntax is “do”, followed by the code block, then followed by the while statement. The while part of a do-while block is evaluated after each execution, guaranteeing one minimum. Here’s an example for a while loop. This loop works by first declaring a loop variable outside the loop body. The WHILE key word contains the loop condition in its argument. Inside the loop body the loop variable is incremented or decremented as necessary. When we run this we get the numbers from one through ten as expected. You can use a break statement in loops too!If a loop encounters a break statement, the program’s execution will exit the loop immediately, and move on. If you don’t want a loop to quit completely, but you do want to skip the current iteration, you can use a continue statement. Continue will cause the loop’s current iteration to immediately be considered over, triggering an evaluation of the termination expression and the next iteration. Here’s an example of a while loop that uses a continue statement to avoid printing odd numbers. If the number ‘9’ is reached, the loop exits completely. 
